---
aliases: [2.1 Measurable Functions]
created: 2023-11-13T21:07:27-08:00
modified: 2023-11-13T23:55:27-08:00
tags: 
---
# 2.1 Measurable Functions
-  Measurable functions are morphisms in the category of measurable spaces
>[!def measurable mappings]
>If $(X, \mathcal{M})$ and $(Y, \mathcal{N})$ are measurable spaces, a mapping $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is called $(\mathcal{M}, \mathcal{N})$-measurable, or just measurable when $\mathcal{M}$ and $\mathcal{N}$ are understood, if $f^{-1}(E) \in \mathcal{M}$ for all $E \in \mathcal{N}$.

>[!2.1 Proposition]
>If $\mathcal{N}$ is generated by $\mathcal{E}$, then $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is $(\mathcal{M}, \mathcal{N})$-measurable iff $f^{-1}(E) \in \mathcal{M}$ for all $E \in \mathcal{E}$.
## 2.1 Proof
---

If f meas then $f^{-1}(E) \in \mathcal{M}$  by def since $E\in\mathcal{E} \subset \mathcal{N}$. If $f^{-1}(E) \in \mathcal{M}$ for all $E\in\mathcal{E}$, then $\{E \subset Y | f^{-1}(E)\in \mathcal{M}\}$ contains $\mathcal{E}$. See that this set is a $\sigma$-algebra since $\mathcal{M}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra. Then it follows that $\mathcal{N}$ is contained in this set as it is generated by $\mathcal{E}$. Thus f is meas.

## QED

>[!2.2 Corollary]
>If $X$ and $Y$ are metric (or topological) spaces, every continuous $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is $\left(\mathcal{B}_X, \mathcal{B}_Y\right)$-measurable.
## 2.2 proof
---

since f is continuous then $f^{-1}(E)$ is open for all $E \in Y$, but this means that $f^{-1}(E) \in \mathcal{B}_x$

## QED


> [!def measurable real or complex valued functions]
> If $(X, \mathcal{M})$ is a measurable space, a realor complex-valued function $f$ on $X$ will be called $\mathcal{M}$-measurable, or just measurable, if it is $\left(\mathcal{M}, \mathcal{B}_{\mathbb{R}}\right)$ or $\left(\mathcal{M}, \mathcal{B}_{\mathbb{C}}\right)$ measurable.

>[!def lebesgue measurable / borel measurable]
>$f: \mathbb{R} \rightarrow \mathbb{C}$ is Lebesgue (resp. Borel) measurable if it is $\left(\mathcal{L}, \mathcal{B}_{\mathbb{C}}\right)\left(\right.$ resp. $\left.\left(\mathcal{B}_{\mathbb{R}}, \mathcal{B}_{\mathbb{C}}\right)\right)$ measurable; likewise for $f: \mathbb{R} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$.

>[!2.3 Proposition]
>If $(X, \mathcal{M})$ is a measurable space and $f: X \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$, the following are equivalent:
>a. $f$ is $\mathcal{M}$-measurable.
>b. $f^{-1}((a, \infty)) \in \mathcal{M}$ for all $a \in \mathbb{R}$.
>c. $f^{-1}([a, \infty)) \in \mathcal{M}$ for all $a \in \mathbb{R}$.
>d. $f^{-1}((-\infty, a)) \in \mathcal{M}$ for all $a \in \mathbb{R}$.
>e. $f^{-1}((-\infty, a]) \in \mathcal{M}$ for all $a \in \mathbb{R}$.\
## 2.3 proof

From prop 1.2, the h intervals generate $\mathcal{B}_\mathbb{R}$. Then if the preimage of any h-interval is in $\mathcal{M}$ the f is meas by prop 2.1.

## QED

> [!def measurability on subsets]
> If $(X, \mathcal{M})$ is a measurable space, $f$ is a function on $X$, and $E \in \mathcal{M}$, we say that $f$ is measurable on $E$ if $f^{-1}(B) \cap E \in \mathcal{M}$ for all Borel sets $B$. (Equivalently, $f \mid E$ is $\mathcal{M}_E$-measurable, where $\mathcal{M}_E=\{F \cap E: F \in \mathcal{M}\}$.)

>[!def sigma algebra generated by preimages of a family of functions]
>Given a set $X$, if $\left\{\left(Y_\alpha, \mathcal{N}_\alpha\right)\right\}_{\alpha \in A}$ is a family of measurable spaces, and $f$ : $X \rightarrow Y_\alpha$ is a map for each $\alpha \in A$, there is a unique smallest $\sigma$-algebra on $X$ with respect to which the $f_\alpha$ 's are all measurable, namely, the $\sigma$-algebra generated by the sets $f_\alpha^{-1}\left(E_\alpha\right)$ with $E_\alpha \in \mathcal{N}_\alpha$ and $\alpha \in A$. It is called the $\sigma$-algebra generated by $\left\{f_\alpha\right\}_{\alpha \in A}$.

>[!2.4 Proposition]
>Let $(X, \mathcal{M})$ and $\left(Y_\alpha, \mathcal{N}_\alpha\right)(\alpha \in A)$ be measurable spaces, $Y=$ $\prod_{\alpha \in A} Y_\alpha, \mathcal{N}=\bigotimes_{\alpha \in A} \mathcal{N}_\alpha$, and $\pi_\alpha: Y \rightarrow Y_\alpha$ the coordinate maps. Then $f: X \rightarrow$ $Y$ is $(\mathcal{M}, \mathcal{N})$-measurable iff $f_\alpha=\pi_\alpha \circ f$ is $\left(\mathcal{M}, \mathcal{N}_\alpha\right)$-measurable for all $\alpha$.
## 2.4 proof

$(\implies)$ If f is $(\mathcal{M},\mathcal{N})$-meas then we have that for all $E \in \mathcal{N}$, $f^{-1}(E) \in \mathcal{M}$, and $E$ is an element of the product $\sigma$-algebra so there exists $\{E_\alpha\}_{\alpha \in A}$ st $E_\alpha \in \mathcal{N_\alpha}$ for all $\alpha$ and $E = \prod_\alpha E_\alpha$. since for any $\alpha$, $\pi_\alpha(E) = E_\alpha$  then $f^{-1}(\pi^{-1}_\alpha(E_\alpha))\in \mathcal{M}$ so we have that $f_\alpha=\pi_\alpha \circ f$ is $\left(\mathcal{M}, \mathcal{N}_\alpha\right)$-measurable.

$(\impliedby)$ If $f_\alpha=\pi_\alpha \circ f$ is $\left(\mathcal{M}, \mathcal{N}_\alpha\right)$-measurable for all $\alpha$ then every element in the $\sigma$-algebra generated by $\{f_\alpha\}$ is in $\mathcal{M}$. Then $f$ meas by prop 2.1

## QED
> [!2.5 corollary]
> A function $f: X \rightarrow \mathbb{C}$ is $\mathcal{M}$-measurable iff $\operatorname{Re} f$ and $\operatorname{Im} f$ are M-measurable.
## 2.5 proof

uhh i dont understand the proof in the book. [todo::Folland 2.5]

partial progress: if f $\mathcal{M}$-meas then the preimage of any set in $\mathcal{B}_\mathbb{C}$ is in $\mathcal{M}$ so $f^{-1}(E) =$. can I break $E$ up into the sum of its real and complex part, then it would be more clear.

## QED
> [!def borel $\sigma$-algebra over the extended reals]
> Extended real number system $\overline{\mathbb{R}}=[\infty, \infty]$. We define Borel sets in $\overline{\mathbb{R}}$ by $\mathcal{B}_{\overline{\mathbb{R}}}=\{E \subset \overline{\mathbb{R}}$ : $\left.E \cap \mathbb{R} \in \mathcal{B}_{\mathbb{R}}\right\}$.

> [!def measurable functions with values in the extended reals]
> we define $f: X \rightarrow \overline{\mathbb{R}}$ to be $\mathcal{M}$-measurable if it is $\left(\mathcal{M}, \mathcal{B}_{\overline{\mathbb{R}}}\right)$-measurable

> [!2.6 Proposition]
> If $f, g: X \rightarrow \mathbb{C}$ are $\mathcal{M}$-measurable, then so are $f+g$ and $f g$.
## 2.6 proof

take $E \in \mathcal{B}_{\mathbb{C}}$ then $(f + g)^{-1}(E) = f^{-1}(E) + g^{-1}(E) \in \mathcal{M}$ since f,g meas. similarly take $(fg)^{-1}(E) = f^{-1}(E) g^{-1}(E) \in \mathcal{M}$

umm ok why cant we do this instead. the proof in the book defines some functions

[todo::Folland 2.6]

## QED

2.6 holds for f,g extended real valued. In exercises.

> [!2.7 Proposition]
> If $\left\{f_j\right\}$ is a sequence of $\overline{\mathbb{R}}$-valued measurable functions on $(X, \mathcal{M})$, then the functions
> $$\begin{array}{ll} g_1(x)=\sup _j f_j(x), & g_3(x)=\limsup _{j \rightarrow \infty} f_j(x), \\ g_2(x)=\inf _j f_j(x), & g_4(x)=\liminf _{j \rightarrow \infty} f_j(x) \end{array}$$
> are all measurable. If $f(x)=\lim _{j \rightarrow \infty} f(x)$ exists for every $x \in X$, then $f$ is measurable.

